docs/rfcs/stage-1/0109-locald-doctor.md, before:

---
title: locald doctor
stage: 1
feature: Installation & Update Experience
---

# RFC 0109: locald doctor

## Status

- **Status**: Proposed (Stage 1)
- **Owner**: TBD

## 1. Summary

Add a `locald doctor` command that diagnoses host readiness for running `locald` and prints actionable fixes.

Initial scope focuses on the most common root causes of “mysterious” failures or degraded behavior:

- Privileged shim availability (`locald-shim` discovery + permissions + version)
- cgroup v2 availability and cgroup-based cleanup readiness
- Optional “runtime basics” checks (daemon reachability / sandbox environment clarity)

This RFC explicitly targets failure modes already observed in CI and containerized environments:

- systemd “presence” false positives (systemd artifacts exist on disk but PID 1 is not systemd)
- a shim that exists but cannot perform privileged work in practice (e.g. `nosuid` mounts, policy enforcement)
- cgroup v2 being mounted without being ready for the required hierarchy/ownership model

## 2. Motivation

`locald` increasingly relies on privileged and host-dependent features:

- `locald-shim` must exist, be root-owned, and be setuid for privileged operations.
- Container execution relies on the shim.
- Reliable process-tree cleanup (including leaked/double-forked subprocesses) relies on cgroup v2 and a configured locald cgroup root.

When these prerequisites are missing, users often see confusing partial failures (or silent fallbacks). A single command that diagnoses the environment and points to the exact fix reduces support burden and builds trust.

## 3. Goals

- Provide a single, obvious entry point to validate a `locald` installation.
- Make “no privileged shim available” a first-class, top-priority diagnosis.
- Report whether cgroup-based cleanup is enabled or the system is in degraded (PID-only) mode.
- Print actionable “do this next” commands.
- Support machine-readable output for CI / bug reports.

Additional design goal (to prevent “doctor as a troubleshooting tree”):

- Prefer a single canonical remediation path (`sudo locald admin setup`) whenever it is the correct fix.

## 4. Non-Goals

- Auto-fixing privileged issues by default.
- Making the daemon run as root.
- Replacing existing `sudo locald admin setup` behavior.
- Becoming a comprehensive OS diagnostics tool (system-wide kernel audit, etc.).

Non-goal (scope control):

- Building a large branching troubleshooting assistant. Doctor should diagnose a small set of high-leverage prerequisites and point to the canonical fix.

## 5. User Experience

### 5.1 CLI Surface

- `locald doctor`
  - Human-oriented output.
  - Exit non-zero if any **critical** checks fail.

Options:

- `locald doctor --json`
  - Machine-readable output.
- `locald doctor --verbose`
  - Includes extra environment details useful for debugging.

### 5.2 Output Principles

- Output is grouped by category.
- Each failed check includes:
  - What is wrong
  - Why it matters
  - The exact fix command(s)

Remediation ordering rule:

- If multiple checks fail, doctor should prefer showing one canonical fix first (typically `sudo locald admin setup`) rather than a long list of bespoke actions.

## 6. Checks

### 6.0 Strategy Reporting (required)

Doctor must report which cgroup root strategy it believes applies on this host, and why.

- systemd strategy: only when systemd is actually managing the host (e.g. PID 1 is systemd)
- direct strategy: otherwise

This avoids a known failure mode in CI/containers where systemd-related files exist on disk but systemd is not PID 1.

### 6.1 Shim Readiness (critical)

Checks:

- Can we locate a privileged shim using the strict discovery rules?
- Is it root-owned and setuid?
- Does the shim version match what `locald` expects?

Additionally, doctor should run a non-destructive “usability” smoke test to prove that the shim can actually perform privileged work in practice.

This specifically targets failures where the shim appears correct on disk but cannot elevate or cannot perform required operations (e.g. `nosuid` mounts, security policy enforcement).

If any of these fail, doctor should recommend:

- `sudo locald admin setup`

### 6.2 Cgroup Readiness (critical for cgroup-based cleanup)

Checks:

- Is cgroup v2 available? (e.g. `/sys/fs/cgroup/cgroup.controllers` exists)
- Is the expected locald cgroup root present?
  - systemd strategy: `/sys/fs/cgroup/locald.slice` exists
  - direct strategy: `/sys/fs/cgroup/locald` exists

Doctor should also clearly state whether `locald` will run in:

- **Enabled mode**: cgroup-based cleanup is available; stop/restart can reliably kill process trees.
- **Degraded mode**: cgroup-based cleanup is not available; stop/restart will fall back to PID-based behavior which may not reliably kill leaked subprocess trees.

If this fails, doctor should recommend:

- `sudo locald admin setup`

### 6.3 Runtime Basics (non-critical initially)

Initial (optional) checks:

- Is the daemon reachable? (socket present / ping works)
- If sandbox mode is active, report sandbox identity (e.g. `LOCALD_SANDBOX_NAME`) to aid reproductions.

## 7. Exit Codes

- Exit `0` when all **critical** checks pass.
- Exit non-zero when any **critical** check fails.

In JSON mode, the exit code behavior is the same.

## 8. Data Model (for --json)

The JSON output should be a stable, structured report.

Proposed shape:

- `version`: locald version string (if available)
- `checks[]`:
  - `id`: stable string id (e.g. `shim.present`, `shim.permissions`, `cgroup.v2`, `cgroup.root_ready`)
  - `severity`: `critical | warning | info`
  - `status`: `pass | fail | skip`
  - `summary`: one-line summary
  - `details`: optional longer text
  - `remediation[]`: zero or more recommended commands (strings)

Recommended additions:

- `strategy`: `{ "cgroup_root": "systemd" | "direct", "why": "..." }`
- `mode`: `enabled | degraded`

## 9. Implementation Plan (Stage 2)

- Implement `locald doctor` in `locald-cli`.
- Reuse existing logic:
  - shim discovery + version checks
  - cgroup detection + root readiness checks
  - daemon reachability/ping (if already available)
- Render either human text or JSON from a single internal report struct.

Where possible, doctor should reuse the same “capability acquisition” checks used by privileged operations (see companion RFC).

## 10. Drawbacks

- Adds a new “front door” command that must be kept accurate as features evolve.

## 11. Alternatives

- Rely on ad-hoc error messages scattered across commands.
- Add a one-shot diagnostic to `locald admin setup` only (but that’s less discoverable).

## 12. Unresolved Questions

- Should `locald doctor` support an explicit `--fix` mode in the future?
- Should we expand checks to include deeper kernel/runtime prerequisites for `libcontainer` (namespaces, mount options), or keep the scope intentionally narrow?

Commit message:

RFC 0110: promote privileged capability acquisition

docs/rfcs/stage-1/0109-locald-doctor.md, after:

---
title: locald doctor
stage: 1
feature: Installation & Update Experience
---

# RFC 0109: locald doctor

## Status

- **Status**: Proposed (Stage 1)
- **Owner**: TBD

## 1. Summary

Add a `locald doctor` command that diagnoses host readiness for running `locald` and prints actionable fixes.

Initial scope focuses on the most common root causes of “mysterious” failures or degraded behavior:

- Privileged shim availability (`locald-shim` discovery + permissions + version)
- cgroup v2 availability and cgroup-based cleanup readiness
- Optional “runtime basics” checks (daemon reachability / sandbox environment clarity)

This RFC explicitly targets failure modes already observed in CI and containerized environments:

- systemd “presence” false positives (systemd artifacts exist on disk but PID 1 is not systemd)
- a shim that exists but cannot perform privileged work in practice (e.g. `nosuid` mounts, policy enforcement)
- cgroup v2 being mounted without being ready for the required hierarchy/ownership model

## 2. Motivation

`locald` increasingly relies on privileged and host-dependent features:

- `locald-shim` must exist, be root-owned, and be setuid for privileged operations.
- Container execution relies on the shim.
- Reliable process-tree cleanup (including leaked/double-forked subprocesses) relies on cgroup v2 and a configured locald cgroup root.

When these prerequisites are missing, users often see confusing partial failures (or silent fallbacks). A single command that diagnoses the environment and points to the exact fix reduces support burden and builds trust.

## 3. Goals

- Provide a single, obvious entry point to validate a `locald` installation.
- Make “no privileged shim available” a first-class, top-priority diagnosis.
- Report whether cgroup-based cleanup is enabled or the system is in degraded (PID-only) mode.
- Print actionable “do this next” commands.
- Support machine-readable output for CI / bug reports.

Additional design goal (to prevent “doctor as a troubleshooting tree”):

- Prefer a single canonical remediation path (`sudo locald admin setup`) whenever it is the correct fix.

## 4. Non-Goals

- Auto-fixing privileged issues by default.
- Making the daemon run as root.
- Replacing existing `sudo locald admin setup` behavior.
- Becoming a comprehensive OS diagnostics tool (system-wide kernel audit, etc.).

Non-goal (scope control):

- Building a large branching troubleshooting assistant. Doctor should diagnose a small set of high-leverage prerequisites and point to the canonical fix.

## 5. User Experience

### 5.1 CLI Surface

- `locald doctor`
  - Human-oriented output.
  - Exit non-zero if any **critical** checks fail.

Options:

- `locald doctor --json`
  - Machine-readable output.
- `locald doctor --verbose`
  - Includes extra environment details useful for debugging.

### 5.2 Output Principles

- Output is grouped by category.
- Each failed check includes:
  - What is wrong
  - Why it matters
  - The exact fix command(s)

Remediation ordering rule:

- If multiple checks fail, doctor should prefer showing one canonical fix first (typically `sudo locald admin setup`) rather than a long list of bespoke actions.

## 6. Checks

### 6.0 Strategy Reporting (required)

Doctor must report which cgroup root strategy it believes applies on this host, and why.

- systemd strategy: only when systemd is actually managing the host (e.g. PID 1 is systemd)
- direct strategy: otherwise

This avoids a known failure mode in CI/containers where systemd-related files exist on disk but systemd is not PID 1.

### 6.1 Shim Readiness (critical)

Checks:

- Can we locate a privileged shim using the strict discovery rules?
- Is it root-owned and setuid?
- Does the shim version match what `locald` expects?

Additionally, doctor should run a non-destructive “usability” smoke test to prove that the shim can actually perform privileged work in practice.

This specifically targets failures where the shim appears correct on disk but cannot elevate or cannot perform required operations (e.g. `nosuid` mounts, security policy enforcement).

If any of these fail, doctor should recommend:

- `sudo locald admin setup`

### 6.2 Cgroup Readiness (critical for cgroup-based cleanup)

Checks:

- Is cgroup v2 available? (e.g. `/sys/fs/cgroup/cgroup.controllers` exists)
- Is the expected locald cgroup root present?
  - systemd strategy: `/sys/fs/cgroup/locald.slice` exists
  - direct strategy: `/sys/fs/cgroup/locald` exists

Doctor should also clearly state whether `locald` will run in:

- **Enabled mode**: cgroup-based cleanup is available; stop/restart can reliably kill process trees.
- **Degraded mode**: cgroup-based cleanup is not available; stop/restart will fall back to PID-based behavior which may not reliably kill leaked subprocess trees.

If this fails, doctor should recommend:

- `sudo locald admin setup`

### 6.3 Runtime Basics (non-critical initially)

Initial (optional) checks:

- Is the daemon reachable? (socket present / ping works)
- If sandbox mode is active, report sandbox identity (e.g. `LOCALD_SANDBOX_NAME`) to aid reproductions.

## 7. Exit Codes

- Exit `0` when all **critical** checks pass.
- Exit non-zero when any **critical** check fails.

In JSON mode, the exit code behavior is the same.

## 8. Data Model (for --json)

The JSON output should be a stable, structured report.

Proposed shape:

- `version`: locald version string (if available)
- `checks[]`:
  - `id`: stable string id (e.g. `shim.present`, `shim.permissions`, `cgroup.v2`, `cgroup.root_ready`)
  - `severity`: `critical | warning | info`
  - `status`: `pass | fail | skip`
  - `summary`: one-line summary
  - `details`: optional longer text
  - `remediation[]`: zero or more recommended commands (strings)

Recommended additions:

- `strategy`: `{ "cgroup_root": "systemd" | "direct", "why": "..." }`
- `mode`: `enabled | degraded`

Note: the structured model and fix consolidation should be shared with privileged capability acquisition (see RFC 0110) so doctor and privileged operations cannot drift.

## 9. Implementation Plan (Stage 2)

- Implement `locald doctor` in `locald-cli`.
- Reuse existing logic:
  - shim discovery + version checks
  - cgroup detection + root readiness checks
  - daemon reachability/ping (if already available)
- Render either human text or JSON from a single internal report struct.

Where possible, doctor should reuse the same “capability acquisition” checks used by privileged operations (see companion RFC).

Concretely:

- define a shared readiness report (strategy + mode + problems + consolidated fixes)
- make `locald doctor` primarily a renderer for that report

## 10. Drawbacks

- Adds a new “front door” command that must be kept accurate as features evolve.

## 11. Alternatives

- Rely on ad-hoc error messages scattered across commands.
- Add a one-shot diagnostic to `locald admin setup` only (but that’s less discoverable).

## 12. Unresolved Questions

- Should `locald doctor` support an explicit `--fix` mode in the future?
- Should we expand checks to include deeper kernel/runtime prerequisites for `libcontainer` (namespaces, mount options), or keep the scope intentionally narrow?
