docs/rfcs/0010-privileged-ports.md, before:

---
title: "Privileged Ports: Capabilities over Root"
stage: 3
feature: Architecture
---

# RFC: Privileged Ports: Capabilities over Root

## 1. Summary

The daemon shall run as the user, but use `setcap` to bind to privileged ports (80/443).

## 2. Motivation

We want to bind port 80 for clean URLs, but running the entire daemon as root violates the principle of least privilege and Axiom 04 (Process Ownership).

## 3. Detailed Design

The binary is granted `cap_net_bind_service` capability. This allows it to bind to ports < 1024 without being root.

### Terminology

- **Capabilities**: Linux capabilities (fine-grained privileges).
- **cap_net_bind_service**: The capability to bind to privileged ports.

### User Experience (UX)

Users run `locald admin setup` (which uses sudo) once to apply the capabilities.

### Architecture

N/A

### Implementation Details

`setcap cap_net_bind_service=+ep path/to/binary`.

## 4. Drawbacks

- Requires `sudo` for setup.
- Capabilities are cleared when the binary is recompiled/replaced.

## 5. Alternatives

- Run as root (insecure).
- Port forwarding (iptables).
- `authbind`.

## 6. Unresolved Questions

None.

## 7. Future Possibilities

- `locald-shim` (Phase 21) to avoid giving capabilities to the main binary.

Commit message:

fix(server): use shim for hosts auto-sync
Docs: update RFCs to recommend sudo locald admin setup when shim is missing.

docs/rfcs/0010-privileged-ports.md, after:

---
title: "Privileged Ports: Capabilities over Root"
stage: 3
feature: Architecture
---

# RFC: Privileged Ports: Capabilities over Root

## 1. Summary

The daemon shall run as the user, but use `locald-shim` (setuid root) to bind to privileged ports (80/443) and pass file descriptors back to the unprivileged daemon.

## 2. Motivation

We want to bind port 80 for clean URLs, but running the entire daemon as root violates the principle of least privilege and Axiom 04 (Process Ownership).

## 3. Detailed Design

Privileged port binding is performed by the setuid-root `locald-shim`, keeping the daemon unprivileged.

This avoids granting extra privileges (capabilities) to the main `locald` binary and keeps all privileged operations centralized in the shim.

### Terminology

- **Capabilities**: Linux capabilities (fine-grained privileges).
- **cap_net_bind_service**: The capability to bind to privileged ports.
- **Shim**: `locald-shim`, a small setuid-root helper for privileged operations.

### User Experience (UX)

Users run `sudo locald admin setup` once to install and configure `locald-shim` (owned by root with the setuid bit set).

After setup, the daemon can request privileged ports by invoking the shim as-needed.

### Architecture

N/A

### Implementation Details

- `locald-shim bind <port>` binds the privileged port and passes the FD back to the daemon (e.g. via `SCM_RIGHTS`).
- The daemon uses the received listener for the proxy and remains an unprivileged process.

## 4. Drawbacks

- Requires `sudo` for setup.
- The shim is a privileged binary and must stay minimal and well-audited.

## 5. Alternatives

- Run as root (insecure).
- Port forwarding (iptables).
- `authbind`.

## 6. Unresolved Questions

None.

## 7. Future Possibilities

- If needed, restrict which privileged operations the shim supports even further.
- Consider additional hardening (seccomp/apparmor) around the shim.
